General Simpson, why is it that you believe that a woman somehow cannot march as well as a man?
And that wonderful old man said in his, oh, he said, listen, you have not heard me say that a woman can't march as well as a man.
In my opinion, they can march a hell of a lot better.
He said, I don't know why it is, but if you get a woman's outfit competing
against a bunch of guys in marching, they'll win every time.
Bingo.
I mean, the Justice Department was astounded at that straightforward answer.
They then asked, you know, these people are not in the same room at the same time.
Then they asked Colonel Haney.
Colonel Haney, why is it that you believe that women in your band would somehow...
mess them up or destroy their ability to do what they do.
Joe Tom says, look, hold on, King's X.
You've got to understand, I was a public school bandmaster for a lot of years before I got here and wear this uniform.
I said, I know girls can march in a band.
Don't, don't.
You've got me pegged wrong if you think.
But there are other issues.
And the other issues had to do with the, from an administrative standpoint, there were legitimate issues associated with where are you going to house them.
We had women dispersed.
Well, we did not.
We had women.
The Justice Department wanted us to disperse the women and integrate every outfit.
And we knew that there was a,
if the girls were going to be successful in the corps at all and we had women in the corps that they had to have some psychological base i mean you had to have you know a half dozen or eight or ten people in that unit in order for one or two or three to succeed that was one principle that we were wrestling over and so we did not want to
have women living with the band.
The band is an outfit, as you know, a military outfit.
So where they resided and where they'd fall out and what unit they'd be a part of was one of the major hang-ups.
Old True, Dr. Miller and General Simpson and all the commandant were far more amenable and willing
for things to move in the direction that the Justice Department wanted them to move.
But Melanie did not play an instrument.
She wasn't wanting to be in the band.
Melanie had applied for a position in the Ross Volunteers.
And there were two positions open.
I mean, we just walked into a rolling ball of butchering eyes on that deal because we
All of a sudden, she was rejected, and it was pretty clear that it was a sex-biased rejection.
And so she had a very good lawsuit, and what began as one grievance became a lawsuit going across the whole Corps makeup from Rudder Rangers to the band.
Now, hadn't she earlier applied to be on the fish drill team?
I believe that's true.
Either she had or there were examples of others who had.
And so there had been some exclusionary practice that had occurred.
And, you know, when you have done that, it gets to be pretty hard to run from facts, doesn't it?
When you get into a lawsuit mode and you've got people deposed under oath, it was not a winnable lawsuit.
All right.
And when was the suit concluded?
Do you remember?
Well, I don't.
I know it got appealed all the way up to the U.S. Supreme Court, and I can't remember the date.
but many years after she was flying a jet in the Air Force.
All right, let me, were you by chance present the day she graduated?
I was not.
All right, let me add to this tape a personal experience.
This is the last of our three spring commencements in May of 1980.
I was dean of faculties, and in those days my job was to carry the mace
put it in its stand and then I would normally go to the back row on the stage.
Sometimes I carried a paperback book inside my commencement program and I would
read the paperback while I was sitting there through three hours of degrees being passed out.
On that day I didn't, our speaker was Lieutenant Governor Bill Hobby.
And after his speech and the other introductory formalities, they're giving out the diplomas, and he motions for me to come up and sit next to him to chat.
And I had already been selected as the president at the University of Texas at El Paso.
planning to go out there about the first of July.
And this is early May.
And he said, we've been friends for 20 years or so.
And when you get out there, stay in touch.
Maybe I can help with a special item every now and then.
So forth we're chatting and I'm feeling very thrilled at his interest and I began to realize we're about through with passing out all the diplomas and I'm about to go back to my seat in the back row and suddenly I hear and notice some hissing by members of the graduating class, particularly corps members.
And I glance around and notice to my right that a person is about to come up on the stage to get her diploma.
And I said, oh, my goodness, it's Melanie Zentgraf.
And Lieutenant Governor Hobby said, oh, my goodness, she's been a pain in my back.
She's been over there.
She has written me letters and phone calls and this and that.
Gee, my knee.
It...
By sheer, sheer unplanned accident, she was the last degree recipient of the last of three commencements.
And I've always assumed.
Of course, Z would make her last.
Right.
But I've assumed that her family probably thought we deliberately did that.
The way it came about, the colleges graduate by alphabetical order, and her undergraduate degree was in medical science, pre-medical science, whatever it was called, and that was administered within the College of Veterinary Medicine.
That's the last of the schools alphabetically.
Her name began with a Z.
So she's the last person in the last major in the last college.
And she comes up, and Dr. Miller, President Miller, is standing about three feet from where I was seated.
And...
By this time, everyone in the auditorium is looking because it's the last degree recipient.
There's some hissing, and they are looking, and he hands her her diploma, and she takes it in her right hand instead of normally her left.
She then shifts it to her left hand and puts out her right hand, and he says to her, as I recall comparatively softly, no way I'm going to shake your hand.
A number of people within eyesight of what happened kind of gasped and took a deep breath and kind of elbowed the person next to them.
She then turned to Bob Lacey, the admissions director who was a registrar who was handing the diplomas to Dr. Miller, and put her hand out to him, and he said, ma'am, I'm not involved in this argument.
She then looked around, and Don Carter, the director of admissions, said, ma'am, would you keep the line moving?
She went on off the stage, and when we got to the letterman's lounge, where we all would take off our caps and gowns, I remember a number of regents saying, damn right, serves her right.
I wouldn't shake hands with her either.
That was a bunch of trouble.
I understand that about six, eight weeks later, that when the board terminated Dr. Miller and told him of their decision, that by word of mouth, the first item they said to him was you refused to shake hands with an A&M graduate.
I can't vouch for that.
No, I can't either.
I wasn't in that room that day.
I know what was happening there.
prior to his dismissal, and it had nothing to do with that.
Oh, I know that.
But indeed, they may have pitched that out along with everything else.
And that was just as I understand it.
Now, the Zentgraf case went on years?
Oh, yes.
Four, five, six years.
And did we agree to comply?
There was a decision handed down.
Yes, sir.
And, you know, I left in 1984 and was out until mid-86.
Okay.
And during that period is when the matter finally got ultimately and finally healed and resolved.
And, you know, it had the result of placing the university in a,
in a compulsory situation with respect to how it treated women in the Corps.
I'm not sure that it differed largely from what we were willing to do.
It's just sometimes you'd rather fight than be told.
And that was one of those cases.
I had a similar kind of agitator student when I got to the University of Texas at El Paso and my first four or five years there and unknown to me at commencement he had stationed photographers and reporters in the audience because he thought that I wouldn't shake his hand.
When I heard his name called out, I waved my hands.
I applauded.
I walked over to him.
I said, mi amigo.
And he said, I wondered if you would shake my hands.
And I told him, I said, I am so delighted you are graduating.
I can't wait for you to walk across this stage.
and he laughed and we got our pick yeah and it went splendidly all right in those uh you said you the 76 to 84 period what were some other significant legal matters that you had to deal with the gay student services organization was one that emerged as a
organization on campus seeking to be recognized as a student organization.
And they were not permitted to do so and a lawsuit ensued.
And again, you could look at the case law in America and know that we were in some difficult position in the federal courts
even though we had state statutes that made the activity unlawful, the issue that jumps up in front of the activity is the right of assembly and the right to free speech.
And so those equal protection of the law in the 14th Amendment and all those issues were very real constitutional issues.
And there have been cases in Missouri and cases in New Hampshire, as I recall.
And I remember counting the votes of the judges, although both of those cases had prevailed against the universities.
You know, it was two to one here and three to two there.
And I was counting all the judges votes and I had a tie.
That's the best I could come up with.
One of those cases, Ross Sterling was the U.S. District Judge in the Southern District in Houston.
And he, in a one-sentence ruling, just almost arbitrarily ruled against their case and gave us a trial court victory, which instantly put us in the Fifth Circuit deal.
And sooner or later,
When you get help like that, all it does is cost you a lot of money.
Because the case came back and had to be tried, and then was tried, and went all the way back to be a circuit on our account then.
And we took it also.
We at least filed a writ of certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court.
There is a record of that in the Supreme Court Journal.
So again, that case...
took an enormous amount of energy and time.
So it was a thief of time and legal energy and administrative energy.
But a matter of principle.
We've perceived that principle as long as the women in the family event they prevail.
It's almost like an issue expired because the truth of the matter is
The numbers were so slight that it was almost a cause that didn't have any likelihood of ever measuring much.
And that's kind of the case.
I don't think the whole issue of homosexuality or gay student organization has ever risen to hardly be a problem.
which of the major cases you dealt with attracted your greatest zeal that you were most interested in in pursuing
Was there one that you...
When you started and when you completed, what were the major issues then and
And then at the end, how did things change in those two decades?
What changed?
And they changed almost immediately.
And you almost take on the role of having been a catalyst for change.
But what I saw change rapidly, and I think considerably more than before, is
What I consider to be a immobilization on the part of the administrator, fearful of the lawsuit, and that it almost put people in a position where they would not make good sense of practical judgment.
that would, in many cases, have moved the matter to the sidelines or gotten you on past it.
The law and lawsuits seem to have a punitive effect on academicians.
For example, we used to have just a hard-nosed position arising out of some
Some fear, and Dr. Calhoun and others I'll think of in a minute, were so fearful that if you gave a person another year or two of just a teaching assignment, that somehow that was going to invest in them
the fact that we could never get through.
Well, there was some room for that fear, but there were some cases that gave you the fear.
Matt Preston, if you will, had just a hard position on that.
And I used to argue that any lawyer worth his time, dealing with a faculty member who was genuine in what they were wanting to do, couldn't.
fashion and agreement that would be binding, that would not be something that they could set aside, that would not be anything that they could ignore, and it would completely wipe out the fear of the faculty movement.
The example of Mary Kay King, I think, as a math instructor, life of a faculty member.
which the rest of them didn't want to teach from
care if she was a lecturer or whether she was an assistant professor or what she did to teach math.
And I used to argue with Matt and Dr. Hume that there are some basic principles that teach in math and English and semi-structure and some of those what I call service courses and all these things.
But I just didn't see why any person who was doing it had to also be a researcher and be able to publish something.
And I understood their argument, of course, for that.
If you only have so many slots and so much money in a department, you want as big of people and as high-fiving people as you can get rid of.
to bring the reputation of the department.
But I still maintain there are service schools in any university of whatever stature that need to be taught by people that are good at what they do and that there is room in the academy for people to enter into certain kinds of contracts and be good at what they're good at and at what they're good at.
I'm preaching to a guy that's been a president who probably has a completely different view from me.
No.
But I will say to you that's one of the strange things about the academy that I'm able to explain.
No, I agree with you entirely.
Now, I'm going to tell you also that I have a strong belief system.
The opinion system is hugely important.
And it ought to be guarded and protected.
in this business of academic freedom gives a huge importance for the faculty member who is being asked to take plans out of high school and take them to a higher level and let them escape.
And if you don't do it, I've borne witness.
I've stood in that board of regents through, and I have heard regents come there all turned out of shape for some political science professor
that didn't have Bill Moore there the same day they had Kent Kaepernick speak to them at a political conference.
And they were ready to fire them.
Doesn't this mean we're going to have to know who writes these checks?
And so I would stand and regardless of looking at me and asking for help, I'd stand up and say, folks, what we're dealing with is the picture-perfect example of academic freedom.
There's no case that I've ever known of any clearer
If you're going to beat up on this guy, you're beating up on everyone else.
Number one, he's going to beat you.
Number two, you're beating on the thing that ought to be protected in the deal.
Well, that wasn't the point of it.
But I'm just here to tell you that I've been close enough to the subject to know that if you throw away protection, the fact of it,
Now I'm assuming that early on, some of the key cases involved land, property, and gradually the shift was more to individual rights.
And those grievances arose out of all this.
It didn't disappoint anybody, whether it got to anywhere, whether it got dragged through, whether it was kept, whether it was detained or dropped, given a raise or... And civil rights.
Civil rights came along.
And one of the things that I was always against was making sexual preference more of an enumerated item in the...
of oppression against discrimination.
Of course, I did not want to be discriminated against on the basis of sexual preference, but it seemed hugely dangerous to me to add an element that the law had not carved out as a potential principle.
The reason is that we would probably have good and valuable reasons for not retaining
a non-tenured person who's on tenure terms.
And we would never know if the person was a homosexual or not.
But guess what?
If they were, the minute you didn't grant tenure for a perfectly legitimate reason, you're just in the suit.
And why would you want to be in the suit when nobody is granted or not granted tenure based on their
habits or patterns, nor do I believe they ought to be disabled.
Of the homosexual being.
But we all keep sexual activity and sex out of it.
But why build for ourselves another haven for disappointed people to jump in and close themselves with?
And there are cases on the books where they're really like that.
Now, let's go back chronologically now.
Dr. Williams, they recreate the system the board does, 76, 77.
Dr. Williams is moved upstairs no longer.
The chancellor, Jarvis Miller, becomes the president.
You still were at the system level reporting to Clyde Freeman.
In that same activity, I was made vice chancellor.
Oh, okay.
And was made the report to Dr. Wilson.
And I was able to step out of that into a role of my own.
Did the nature of the task that you held change in the late 70s with that?
And they changed because I was accountable to all the parts and to the entities that they were committed to.
It's still that way today.
And it became a matter of substantial dialogue in some
some stress and tension.
And I was in the middle of that and happily was able to maybe be a bit of a mediator or at least a shuttle diplomat between Dr. Miller and Dr. Williams to sort of bargain for relative position.
I could understand Miller's position because the question would be, if I've got a matter
that affect the mind of it, that I want approval from the Lord about it.
Can I retain the evolution or development of my project or program without disclosing to the cancer doctors until I'm ready?
I don't want to do it prematurely.
And yet, I think
that in the evolving of that program, I may need legal input.
Where do you come out of that?
Well, I would go to the university.
Let me share with you an aspect.
Where do I come in from?
I don't like to work for people and know things.
I mean, my loyalty needs to be
But they don't want
I never knew where that really put me.
I mean, it didn't lift me out of the problem, but at least I had faith in God.
description of it.
He had recognized and gave me permission to work with any of our industries like that and give them the confidence that they deserved and what they called the attorney class relationship.
That was a problem.
And then the problem was whether or not Dr. Miller would offer a loan and had to know from before that I
He set about immediately to rewrite the old objective rules and regulations and how pretty much to describe, at least, the person in charge of rewriting them.
And John Blocker and Mr. Gibson and Mr. Davies, all these organization people were ahead with Sears and Southwestern Bell and Dressel.
They were a committee of three at the board to work with working out this new entity that was created and rewrite the board's objective rules and regulations to conform to the fact that we now had a chancellor that had a president.
The issue was, does the president report through the chancellor to the board on everything?
And if the chancellor says no, does that mean or does the president have the right to make his best case with the board stipulating that the chancellor has not given this approval and the chancellor has even changed to articulate why he doesn't recognize it?
Well, you know, we were in hypothetical situations that we were maneuvering in a hypothetical world.
And that did not set me away.
But that was the message I put out to the media.
Dr. Williams was basically trying to be faithful.
He asked me to take that back.
And, you know, I did.
I was on the auditorium, and I was the communicator.
And Dr. Williams, I thought, you know, go, go.